1. We want our kids to have a fun, but also safe, summer. What are some of the top summer safety precautions can we take to keep kids safe this summer?

There are so many great activities that we can enjoy during this time of year, but in particular I would emphasize the following key ideas: sun safety, water safety, and helmets. 

Although some might view sunburns as a summertime right of passage, UV ray exposure can lead to dangerous thermal related injuries and even skin cancer. When possible, both kids and adults should limit outdoor activities between 10am and 4pm when the sun's UV ray exposure is highest. Consider wearing lightweight, tight woven clothing in addition to a brimmed hat and sunglasses. 99% UV blocking sunglasses are preferred and do come in children's sizes. With one exception, everyone should wear sunscreen on a daily basis: children less than 6 months of age, who have a large, very sensitive skin surface area, should avoid direct sun exposure altogether or stay in the shade when possible. If exposure is unavoidable, then a small amount of sunscreen can be applied to small areas of the body such as the face. Sunscreen needs time to work! Apply a broad spectrum sunscreen (meaning it blocks both UVA and UVB rays) with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 15 at least 15 minutes before going outside so it has time to absorb. If possible, avoid sunscreens that contain oxybenzone as there have been some concerns about mild hormonal properties. If oxybenzone sunscreen is your only option, however, the best sunscreen is the one that you'll use. Remember that sunscreen needs to be reapplied every 2 hours regardless of activity level, and again immediately following any period of excessive sweating, toweling off, or swimming. If irritation occurs, look for sunscreens that contain zinc oxide or titanium dioxide. These options will leave a visible residue on the skin, but some brands have added fun colors so kids generally don't mind applying. Avoid combination sunscreen/insect repellent products because insect repellent should not be reapplied as frequently as the sunscreen.

Swimming is a great way to enjoy the season and get some exercise while you're at it! If you decide to go, leave the pool "floaties" at the store. Inflatable swimming aids are NOT a replacement for supervision or approved life jackets, and they give a false sense of security. Remember, even the best swimmers should have a buddy. All children should be directly supervised by an adult when near bodies of water. Children less than five years of age should be within arm's length for "touch supervision." Ideally, an adult supervisor should know how to swim and perform CPR. If you're looking to make water time activities safer for your children, there are studies showing that children over the age of one may be at a lower risk of drowning if they have had some formal swimming instruction. Unfortunately, there is no evidence to date that swimming lessons prevent drowning in babies younger than a year of age. Lastly, children should wear life jackets at all times when on boats, docks, or near open bodies of water. 

For wheeled adventures, children need to wear a helmet for every ride, no matter how close to home their fun may take them. Remember, serious injury can occur in the driveway, too. Look for a label or sticker that indicates the helmet meets "CPSC" safety standards. Helmets should be worn so that they are level on the head, covering the forehead without tipping too far forward or backward. You should be able to fit two fingers between the chin and strap when the strap is securely fastened, making the helmet snug but not too tight. If needed, use the helmet's sizing pads. If there are any cracks or damages discovered before riding, recycle the helmet and get a new one.

2. Giving kids the ability to advocate for themselves is important for their growth - how can we communicate to our kids the importance of safety and be confident they will actually listen and act (for example, still wearing their helmet even though their friends are not)?

You can absolutely have tough (age appropriate) conversations about "why" we do certain things to stay safe. Rather than simply trying to scare kids into behaving because something bad could happen to them, however, let them see you set a good example. Parents know this well: kids are always watching. Put on the sunscreen, wear the life jacket, and don the helmet so that they see how important and easy it can be. Encourage other adults in their life to do the same. Secondly, make safety part of the routine. If they learn to put their helmet on because that's the first step to riding a bike, it will become a habit. Finally, let them participate! There are so many cool products on the market to get kids engaged. Bust out the fun stickers for the helmet. Pick out a life jacket that matches their favorite TV character. Let them get messy when slopping on the sunscreen. If your child experiences peer pressure about safety precautions, this is a great opportunity to let your child know that you trust in them to make the right decisions because this fosters self confidence.

3. When I am not home and grandma or the babysitter are in charge, how can I "relax" knowing my kids are safe and in good hands?

Whether you are working with a babysitter from a national agency, a teen from your neighborhood looking for some summer cash, or grandma is pitching in to help care for your children on date night, you can always consider a trial run. Stay in the home while the sitter watches the kids. You are immediately available for feedback, your sitter can get to know the kids and their routine, and you can feel confident that it's a good fit. Sitters, including family members, should have CPR training and be physically and mentally capable of handling emergency situations if they arise. For this reason, sitters should be at least 13 years of age. Provide your sitter with a list of emergency contact information (parents' phone numbers, neighbors' phone numbers, your pediatrician, fire/rescue, police, poison help line 1-800-222-1222, home phone and home address). Get background checks and references when possible. Review fire escape plans with your sitter. Lastly, set clear expectations. This includes meal times, medication administration if needed, and any other hard boundaries that you need to set (for example, no screens after a certain point in the evening). 

4. Summertime is a fun time, so not being the "helicopter parent" and trying to ease up and let kids be kids is a constant struggle. What advice can you give to parents to help them find that balance between "letting go" and being a safe, precocious parent?

If you're struggling with the balance between holding back and helicopter parent, know that you're not alone! It means that you care about your kids and that's the most important thing that you can do for them. The challenge with parenting is that there is no amount of parenting class or advice from parenting magazines or counseling from your mom and pediatrician can prepare you for every situation. The good news is that kids are smart, kids are resilient, and kids are constantly learning. It's okay to set limits or to stop an action altogether if it's going to result in harm, but after you have given them boundaries ("we wear a helmet before we ride our bike, every time"), kids need to be able to get messy and make mistakes. I would also encourage parents to make sure that they are taking time to care for themselves. Summertime is a wonderful season for many, but the lack of routine and external pressure to make every day memorable can be overstimulating and overwhelming for some. If you find that you are struggling with anxiety or stress, make an appointment to talk with your doctor about how you can get help. 

5. Why is it important for our kids to know that they are trusted by us (for example, avoiding constantly saying "be careful" or "don't do this" can turn into negative reinforcement, preventing them from taking risks, making mistakes and being creative.

It's important for our kids to know that they are trusted by the adults in their lives. This fosters a sense of self confidence that allows them to grow into adults who can make decisions without overwhelming fear. They will learn to explore, to take reasonable risks and that it's normal to make mistakes - that's how new ideas are generated and how we learn new skills! If we constantly provide negative feedback and intervention when there is minimal potential harm, we generate anxiety about new situations rather than encouraging our kids' natural instinct to appreciate that the world around us is pretty amazing if we get out there to explore it.  

Please feel free to add anything here (advice to parents, resources, etc) that we may have missed!

1) Advice from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) on building resilience in children: https://www.healthychildren.org/English/healthy-living/emotional-wellness/Building-Resilience/Pages/Building-Resilience-in-Children.aspx 

2) AAP on babysitting reminders: https://www.healthychildren.org/English/safety-prevention/at-home/Pages/Babysitting-Reminders.aspx

3) AAP on additional summer safety including info about playgrounds, fireworks, and bugs: https://www.healthychildren.org/English/safety-prevention/at-play/Pages/Summer-Safety-Tips-Staying-Safe-Outdoors.aspx

4) Lastly, AAP on swimming safety including more information about pool safety guidelines such as fencing and drains: https://www.healthychildren.org/English/safety-prevention/at-play/Pages/Summer-Safety-Tips-Sun-and-Water-Safety.aspx